wow this port is so buzzing thousands of
people come here every day to work
cargos come and go fishers are weighing
their catches for the day
and even posh cruise ships pop in here
to show this idyllic place to
all the people on vacay the ocean shore
is fantastic
people walk along the beach eating ice
cream or building sand castles
oh and by the way right now we're
standing where the sahara desert used to
be
normally our lifetime is too short to
see any major changes
we don't notice mountains rise or the
way rivers change their course
entire valleys may be sinking but it
usually takes too long for them to sink
entirely
still a group of scientists recently
noticed there's a new ocean being formed
really fast
and we can even witness it appear look
here
it's the afar triangle there's the horn
of africa peninsula not far away
it's the exact site where the sixth
ocean is being born
at the moment wherever you are you're
basically standing or sitting on a
tectonic plate
you're just sitting on a couch watching
this video cool
your couch is standing on the floor your
floor makes part
of your house your house is standing on
the ground and if you take a deeper look
it all stands on one of 15 principal
tectonic plates
together these chunks are referred to as
lithosphere
it's like a nice apple pie the crust is
the lithosphere
and the fragile apple filling is
everything that's on the planet's
surface
if the crust cracks the filling leaks
out
and this is what any earthquake is like
a tectonic plate
aka the crust moves the filling
also known as houses and people is
disturbed
africa is made up of two plates the
nubian and the somali ones
yeah that's a large pie and it seems
like these two plates are constantly
separating
it leads to an oceanic spreading ridge
it looks like the african continent
is literally unzipping a part of it at
this moment
a 345 square mile chunk of the sahara
desert
just split so the magma rose it
triggered a series of earthquakes across
ethiopia eritrea and djibouti and it's
not just some minor earthquake
there are lots of fumes rising from
those fissures
and it smells like sulfur pew the
eruption
slowly pushed the old lava sediments
away
which is followed by creation of the new
sea floor
the crack is filled with magma and when
it cools it forms the new
oceanic floor if this process doesn't
stop
the red sea will finally flood the area
forming the sixth ocean
and africa will be split into two parts
so we'll basically have
two africas but wait wait wait neither
you
nor your grandchildren are gonna see
that sixth ocean
you'll only have five of them throughout
your life same with our future
generations
same old pacific atlantic indian arctic
and the southern oceans before the
oceanic floor gets
solid and before the red sea actually
starts flowing in there
many thousands if not millions of years
must pass
the continents move as fast as your
nails grow and imagine that the longest
nail ever seen in history
was the thumbnail of an indian man
reaching almost six and a half
feet before he cut his nails it took him
almost 60 years to grow it
now think how far the cottons will have
to move by the time you celebrate your
100th birthday spoiler
it's not going to be very far but anyway
you can witness some minor changes that
take place even now
all those cracks that may not seem that
significant so far
make all the landscape in the afar
region look really unique
there's a couple more reasons for this
uniqueness meet erta ale in ethiopia
the volcano famous for its world's
longest lasting lava lake
it's located in the afar depression also
known as the afar triangle
by the way depression refers to the
sunken area there's nothing sad about it
it's not the only volcano in this area
eritrea known as the nabro volcano
it's never erupted yet the lava in this
area is pretty
active more volcanoes are to come
because of the tectonic plate movements
they pull away from each other and the
earth's crust gets
thinner the weaker the area is the more
volcanoes there are
okay the plates are separating and it's
kind of inevitable
it's just the question of time this
process is also called the afar plume
we'll get more volcanoes it's inevitable
either
but how does it happen remember that
apple pie
yes it was delicious well things are
actually much more complicated
the outer layer we walk on is relatively
delicate
and is made up of multiple broken pieces
it's like the eggshell or a lattice top
on a pie let's take a deeper look at all
the ingredients of this pie
if you cut a slice you'll see it's made
up of many parts
and there's something called the
asthenosphere under the lithosphere
it's part of the earth's mantle yeah
complicated
so the asthenosphere gets heated from
within
and it rises just like the dough when
you put it in the oven
remember those cracks on the surface of
a freshly baked loaf of bread
man i'm getting hungry anyway this is
basically what happens to the afar
triangle
and those cracks make this area split
creating those famous rifts and valleys
that will possibly become so large
and will probably get flooded so that
the world's six ocean will appear there
soon
or not nobody's sure about it okay
but since the tectonic plates in which
is logical
all the continents are always on the
move will probably have more continents
in the future
the answer is yes and no if a part of
africa does split
we'll get one more continent which is
going to be even smaller than australia
but there's one more possible way of how
things will go
chances are in the next 250 million
years
okay in the distant 250 million years
there will be no more
transatlantic flights and a walking trip
from japan to chile
will be possible too way too long but
possible
it's all happening now and the first
results will be noticeable in some
50 million years from today i won't be
around then
australia will move towards southeast
asia and it's going to fit in just
perfectly
and africa will be pushed to southern
europe still these transformations will
take a
really long time people in continents
have something in common
remember that continents move as fast as
our hair and nails grow
just about 1.2 inches a month some of
them move even five times faster though
but even this speed is too slow for 4
500 miles distance between africa and
europe
one theory tells us the things we've
already seen before
well you didn't see that with your own
eyes neither did any of your ancestors
who came to america across the atlantic
hundreds of years ago
the fact is all the continents were once
one
landmass known as the pangaea
supercontinent
even though it formed over 300 million
years ago and split about 180 million
years ago
give or take it might come back together
so
kangaroos can easily migrate from
australia to the uk
if they feel like it but the latter
might be accidentally crashed while all
the continents merged together
the americas would collide antarctica
would drift to them
and it all will merge with the already
collided africa eurasia
in this scenario one large ocean and one
large continent will appear
namely novopangia another possible
scenario claims the continents might
merge
into the uniform land mass or form a
circle with a large sea
inside and the super pacific ocean
outside
this continent is referred to as pangaea
ultima
the third theory might be already coming
to life
the pacific and the atlantic oceans
might just cease to exist
forming the new ocean basin eurasia will
be split to form
a new ocean and all the continents will
migrate to merge
into the supercontinent aurica and the
fourth and last theory
claims that the pacific and the atlantic
oceans will remain
almost unchanged and all the continents
but
antarctica will merge into one leaving
poor antarctica even more isolated and
abandoned than it is now
nah don't feel bad since all the
continents keep drifting northwards even
now
it's quite probable that almost all of
them will meet up somewhere at the north
pole